---
slug: remote-esp8266-wol
title: Remote ESP8266 Wake On LAN
authors: max
tags: [esp8266, WOL, esp, windows, WakeOnLAN]

---

This week I ran into a remote desktop issue that turned into an interesting side project. The following project includes setting up Wake On LAN (Henceforth WOL) on windows and remotely triggering it using a ESP8266 and smart ac socket.



In the following section I will walk you through the issue I encountered as well as my.

------

## Problem

When away from home, I often find myself wanting to have access to my home network and computer using a remote desktop client. In order for this remote desktop to work as I imagine it has to be able to sleep while not in use. By allowing the PC to sleep power draw will be cut significantly when not in use.

I have typically used **AnyDesk** as my remote desktop client of choice, however I have typically achieved this with a PC that does not sleep. AnyDesk natively supports WOL, however it has the following limitation:

> "At least one additional AnyDesk device in the network of the sleeping device must be online." [^1]

This limitation makes it nearly impossible to use AnyDesk with WOL in a home setting because the lack of other devices running AnyDesk simultaneously. As a result, I needed to come up with another solution.



## Solution

After giving the issue some thought, it came to mind that I could use another device on the network to be triggered remotely in order to send the "Magic Packet" to the PC.  In order to achieve this I would need another device always on, and thus significant power draw in order to have the ability to wake a device up. This seemed excessive.  After some more research I decided to use a smart AC plug that I can trigger remotely through a cloud app to turn on a device that would send the message. In order to get this up and running quickly as well as keep the physical footprint of the solution down, I ended on an ESP8266.



### Materials Backgound



#### ESP8266



#### Shelly Smart Plug US



## WOL Setup

In order to get WOL working the PC needed to have both the BIOS and windows ethernet adapter settings.

### BIOS Configuration



### Network Driver Configuration



```c showLineNumbers
#include <ESP8266WiFi.h>
#include <WiFiUdp.h>
WiFiUDP UDP;

#include <WakeOnLan.h>
WakeOnLan WOL(UDP); // Pass WiFiUDP class

const char* ssid = "Wifi SSID";
const char* password = "wifipassword";

const char *MACAddress = "00-D8-61-A8-6D-FC";

void setup_wifi() {

  delay(10);
  // We start by connecting to a WiFi network
  Serial.println();
  Serial.print("Connecting to ");
  Serial.println(ssid);

  WiFi.mode(WIFI_STA);
  WiFi.begin(ssid, password);

  while (WiFi.status() != WL_CONNECTED) {
    delay(500);
    Serial.print(".");
  }

  randomSeed(micros());

  Serial.println("");
  Serial.println("WiFi connected");
  Serial.println("IP address: ");
  Serial.println(WiFi.localIP());
  WOL.calculateBroadcastAddress(WiFi.localIP(), WiFi.subnetMask());

  WOL.sendMagicPacket(MACAddress);
  Serial.println("Sending Magic Packet to ");
  Serial.print(MACAddress);
  Serial.println("From ");
  Serial.print(WiFi.localIP());
  Serial.print("  -  ");
   Serial.print(WiFi.subnetMask());
}

void setup() {
  // put your setup code here, to run once:
   Serial.begin(115200);
   setup_wifi();

   WOL.setRepeat(3, 100); // Repeat the packet three times with 100ms delay between
}

void loop() {
  // put your main code here, to run repeatedly:

}
```

[^1]: See anydesk.com help center knowledge base for more information. https://support.anydesk.com/knowledge/wake-on-lan

